XCLEANSPEC
----------

Xcleanspec allows the user to 1.)  clean bad pixels by replacing
the bad pixels using nearby values, 2.) remove regions of telluric 
noise and 3.) smooth the spectra.

Xcleanspec is a fully resizing widget.

Cursor commands:

a - Sets the 'a'bsolute range to the current x and y range

c - Clear mouse mode.
    Use to clear a zoom, fix, or remove session.

f - To fix a region of the spectrum.
    Press and release the left mouse button on the left and 
    right side of the bad region.  The bad region is replaced 
    using the edge pixels to define a line.  Type "s" to save 
    the edit or "u" to undo the edit.

i - To zoom IN in whatever zoom mode the cursor is currently
    in.

o - To zoom OUT in whatever zoom mode the cursor is currently
    in.

r - To remove a region of the spectrum.
    Press and release the left mouse button on the left and 
    right side of the bad region.  The bad region is replaced
    with NaNs.  Type "s" to save the edit or "u" to undo the
    exit

s - To save the edit

u - To undo an edit.  The edit will not be stored.

w - To plot the entire spectrum

x - Enters x zoom mode
    Press and release left mouse button at lower x value and 
    then at upper x value.

y - Enters y zoom mode
    Press and release left mouse button at lower y value and 
    then at upper y value.

z - Enters zoom mode
    Press and release the left mouse button in one corner of the
    zoom box and then move the cursor to the other corner and 
    press and release the left mouse button.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

0.  Type "xcleanspec" at the IDL prompt. This will bring up the 
           Xcleanspec widget.

I.   Loading the Data

       1.  If the user is not working in the directory where the 
           data is stored, enter the path either by clicking on 
           the Path button or by typing the path into the field.
           IF THE USER IS IN THE DIRECTORY WHERE THE DATA IS LOCATED, 
           THEN THIS FIELD CAN BE LEFT BLANK.  

       2.  Load the standard spectra by giving the filename in the
           "Input Spectrum" field.

II.  Cleaning the Spectra

       3.  The user has two options to clean the spectra.  To fix 
           a region of the spectra, type 'f' and then press and release 
           the left mouse button on the left and right side of the 
           bad region.  The bad region is replaced using the edge 
           pixels to define a line.  Type "s" to save the edit or 
           "u" to undo the edit.  Alternatively, the user can simply 
           remove a region of the spectrum by typing 'r' instead of 'f'.

III. Smoothing the Spectra

       4.  Choose either "Savitzky-Golay", which will smooth the spectra
           while preserving the average resolving power, or Gaussian which
           will allow the user to smooth the spectra with a Gaussian kernel.

       5a. The Savitzky-Golay (SG) smoothing routine is described in 
           Numerical Recipes.  Xsmoothspec will automatically 
           provide an estimate of the best SG window based on the slit width 
           in pixels. The best window size is typically 1 to 2 times the slit
           width, although we have found that for the 0.3 arcsecond slit, 
           1.5 times the slit width does nothing.  The degree of the 
           smoothing function can also be chosen, but must always be less 
           than the window size.  *PLEASE CHECK THE FINAL SPECTRA TO MAKE
           SURE YOU ARE HAPPY WITH THE RESULTS.* 

       5b. The Gaussian routine will smooth the spectra with a Gaussian
           with the requested FWHM.  Note since the resolving power 
           changes as a function of wavelength, only the average resolving
 	   power will be modified.  The default FWHM is the slit width given 
	   in pixels.


       6.  The resulting smoothed spectra can now be cleaned again using 
           either the 'f' or 'r' cursor commands.  However, the spectra
           cannot be smoothed again.

IV.  Write the Output File

       6.  Give the name of the output file in the "File Name" field and 
           click on the "Write File"  button.


