XCOMBSPEC
=========

Xcombspec allows the user to combine individual extracted
spectra into a single output spectrum. Xcombspec is typically
used to combine order-separated individual spectra generated 
by Spextool. 

Xcombspec is a fully resizing widget.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cursor commands:

s - Selection of a wavelength range

w - To plot the entire spectrum

x - Enters x zoom mode
    Press and release left mouse button at lower x value and
    then at upper x value.

y - Enters y zoom mode
    Press and release left mouse button at lower y value and
    then at upper y value.

z - Enters zoom mode
    Press and release the left mouse button in one corner of the
    zoom box and then move the cursor to the other corner and
    press and release the left mouse button.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
I. Loading Spectra

   1. Type "xcombspec" at the IDL prompt. This will bring up the Xcombspec panel.

   2. Choose the input mode for the file names. 

      a. If the user wishes to combine several spectral files located in 
         various directories, s/he should create a separate text file listing
         the full path names and filenames of these spectra, and then
         choose the "File" input mode. The filename of the text file can 
         then be input into the "File Name" field, or selected from the 
         list presented when the "File Name" button is clicked.

      b. If "Manual" mode (the default) is chosen, the user must enter 
         the directory path where the data files reside in the "Path" field,
         or click on the "Path" button and choose the path from the list 
         shown. (If xcombspec is started up in the directory containing the
	 data files, no Path name is required.) 

         The user must then specify the manner in which the files are to be read 
	 into xcombspec. If the files to be combined all have the same prefix, 
         but different numbers (e.g., rspec10.fits, rspec11.fits, rspec12.fits, 
         etc.), then the user should choose "Index" mode (the default). The input 
         prefix must be typed into the "Input Prefix" field (e.g. rspec), and 
         the file numbers entered into the "Files" field (e.g., 10-20). 

         If the files have different prefixes, the user should choose the
         "Filename" mode, and specify the file names in the "Files" field. 
         Alternatively, the files can be selected by clicking on the "Files" 
         button and highlighting the file names from the list that is displayed.
  
    3. If the input files contain spectra from multiple apertures that are
      to be combined, the user should select the "Yes" button next to the
      "Combine Apertures" label. Multiple aperture data in a single spectral
      file would be generated if, for example, a faint point source were 
      observed in A-B mode and the individual two-dimensional SpeX data image 
      files were combined before the spectra were extracted, or if multiple 
      sources were positioned on the SpeX slit and spectra of each object were 
      extracted from the individual files. (In the latter case, however, the user 
      would generally not want to combine the aperture spectra.) If the data files 
      consist of observations of a single point source, observed in AB mode and 
      extracted individually, the input files will not contain multiple apertures.

   4. Click on the "Load Spectra" button to load the files. The spectra will
      then be displayed in the display panel on the right hand side. If the data 
      files contain multiple orders, all of the orders will be displayed. 
      The user has the choice of displaying the fluxes, the errors, or the S/N 
      ratios as a function of wavelength, by choosing from the "Type" pull down menu 
      in the upper right hand corner of the panel. The different apertures (if 
      available) can also be viewed by selecting the aperture from the "Aperture" 
      pull down menu in the upper left hand corner.

II. Modifying Spectra: Scaling, Correcting the Spectral Shapes, and Masking Bad Regions

   5. Xcombspec will combine the individual spectra after optionally scaling
      all of them to a selected level. The purpose of combining spectra is to 
      increase the S/N of the source spectrum by averaging out the fluctuations 
      due to noise. However, as a result of guiding errors, variable sky transmission, 
      etc., rarely will it be the case that all of the individual spectra have 
      the same flux level. Directly combining such 'raw' spectra, with their
      different flux levels can defeat the purpose of the combining process, by 
      increasing, rather than decreasing, the noise. Furthermore, one clearly 
      doesn't want to discard most of the spectra. Scaling the spectra (and their 
      associated errors!) to a common flux level will allow the user to make use 
      of the entire data set. One can see the result of combining the spectra
      without any scaling by selecting the "Combined" option from the "Plot:" 
      pull down menu at the top of the plot window. One can also see the S/N 
      spectrum for the combined spectrum by choosing "SNR" from the "Type" pull
      down menu at the top of the plot window. 

      If the user wishes to scale the spectra, s/he should select "Scale" from 
      the pull down menu in "2. Modify Spectra", and choose an order from which the 
      scaling should be determined. Xcombspec determines a *single* scale factor to 
      be applied to all orders of a given spectrum. That is, the factor determined
      for spectrum 2 in order 5 is also applied to the corresponding spectrum 2 in
      order 3. (The previous version of Xcombspec determined separate scale factors 
      for each order. We discuss the reasons for this change and its consequences
      below.) Therefore, we suggest that the scale factors should generally be determined 
      from the middle orders (e.g., 5 in SXD mode), unless the user has a particular 
      reason for choosing another order. (For example, if no flux is detected in the
      higher orders, 7 and 8, it might be better to use order 4 to determine
      the scale factor.) We also recommend choosing an order with a high overall S/N
      value. For example, for the SXD mode, orders 5 or 6 are generally the best 
      to determine the scale factors. Once the order is chosen, the Xscalespec plot 
      window will appear. 

      a. The user should choose a wavelength range to be used to determine
         the scaling factors. Again, it is usually best to select the range
         with the highest count rate. Type "s" and click with the left most
         mouse button to specify the short wavelength limit of the selected 
         range.  Click again with the left most button to specify the long 
         wavelength limit. Dashed blue vertical lines will show the designated 
         wavelength range. The user can also zoom in on any region with the "z" 
         command or use any of the cursor commands (see the cursor command list 
         above).


      b. Choose the type of scaling to be done from the pull down menu next to
         the "Scale to:" label in the upper left of the plot window. The user
         can choose no scaling ("None"), scale all spectra to the median of 
         the plotted spectra ("Median") over the selected wavelength range, or 
         scale to the level of a particular reference spectrum ("Spectrum") 
         over the selected wavelength range. If "Spectrum" is selected, the 
         number of the desired reference spectrum should be chosen from the 
         pull down menu next to the "Spectrum" button. Xcombspec will then  
         determine the scale factors to be applied to each spectrum, and will 
         scale them appropriately. The user can inspect the result with the 
         zoom commands, change the axis limits of the plot, re-select new 
         reference spectra or scaling wavelength ranges, etc. If "None" is chosen
         at any point in this process, the original unscaled spectra will be 
         re-plotted.

         We recommend using the Median for the scaling. 

      c. Once the user is satisfied with the scaling, s/he should click on 
         the "Accept" button. At this point, the plot window will disappear, and 
         the scale factors determined above for each spectrum will be applied to all 
         the spectra in all the orders. If the results are not acceptable, the 
         scaling can be re-determined by choosing a new scaling order, a new 
         reference spectrum, a different wavelength range, or the spectra can 
         be re-loaded and the process repeated from the beginning.
        
   6. Either before or after the scaling step, the user may decide to exclude a 
      particular spectrum from the combining procedure (probably because the 
      spectrum simply has too low S/N - this will become especially apparent 
      after the scaling is done). S/He should then choose the "Remove" option from
      the pull down menu in the "2. Modify Spectra" box. Again, the user should
      choose the order s/he wishes to examine. Upon selecting the order, the 
      XSelectspec plot window will appear, which shows the various color-coded 
      spectra, along with the color key on the left hand side, for the chosen order. 
      The user can zoom in on any region with the "z" command or use any of the 
      cursor commands (see the cursor command list above). A particular 
      spectrum can be excluded from the combining process by unchecking its 
      corresponding box number on the extreme left hand side. This will "turn off" 
      that particular spectrum in the plot window. This feature is also handy for
      identifying individual spectra if there are so many plotted that it is 
      difficult to distinguish them: unclick the buttons next to the labels and 
      note which spectra disappear. (Remember to turn on all spectra to be included 
      in the combining process before leaving the plot window.) Once the user is 
      satisfied with her/his selection, s/he can accept it by clicking on the 
      "Accept" button. Xcombspec will then remove the selected spectra from all  
      the orders and all further procedures in the combining process. Clicking
      on the "Cancel" button, instead, will cancel all selections made in the 
      current Xselectspec window, close the plot window, and return the user to 
      the main window.

      If the spectrum selection step was performed *after* the scaling, Xcombspec
      will remind the user that the scaling may need to be re-computed with the 
      new set of spectra. This is important if the user has chosen to scale to the
      median, as clearly the median of the original set of spectra will be different
      from that obtained with the smaller set.

   7. Ideally, by scaling all spectra in every order to a common value (e.g. the
      median), all the spectra should now lie perfectly on top of one another. However, 
      we have found that this is not the case. After scaling, often the spectra in 
      orders farthest from that used to determine the scale factor exhibit a large 
      dispersion about the reference spectrum chosen in step 5 (e.g. the median). 
      This implies that the spectral slope is varying from one spectrum to another over
      the various orders. One can see this change in spectral slope even across a single
      order if the spectra are examined closely. We believe this slope change is the
      result of guiding errors, atmospheric dispersion, and time-variable, 
      wavelength-dependent changes in seeing. Based on our tests, we do not believe it 
      is due to any procedures carried out by Spextool during the data reduction. 

      The user may choose to reduce the dispersion in the spectra about the reference
      spectrum (and therefore increase the S/N of the final combined spectrum) by 
      correcting for these slope variations. This can be done by clicking on the 
      "Correct Spectral Shape" button. In each spectrum Xcombspec will then remove the 
      low order variations, relative to the reference spectrum, from each spectrum, order
      by order. After this has been done, all the spectra in a given order should lie on 
      top of one another, which will then increase the S/N in the resulting combined 
      spectrum.

      The results of the Correction should be inspected carefully. While we have
      set the parameters of the procedure such that it should work in most cases,
      it can sometimes generate obviously spurious results. This is particularly
      true if the input spectra have very low S/N.

      Note that the "Correct Spectral Shape" step cannot be undone. If the user wishes
      to undo this correction, s/he will have to re-load the spectra and start the 
      combining procedure from the beginning.

   8. For some observing modes, especially in the early days of SpeX, spectra obtained in 
      one of the observing positions (i.e., in the B position of an AB pair) could 
      land on a cluster of bad pixels . In order to exclude the affected wavelength regions 
      in only a subset of spectra in any given order from the combining process, while
      retaining the rest of the spectra (e.g., to exclude the range from, say 1.20 to 1.23 
      microns in only the B beam spectra, but not the A beam spectra in the same order), 
      the user can generate a "Mask" for that order. To do this, the user should 
      choose the order for which a Mask is to be made by selecting it from the "Make Mask:" 
      pull-down menu. Once the order is selected, the Xmkpixmask plot window will appear. 
      Using the cursor command 's' (see the cursor command list above) the user can select 
      a wavelength region to be excluded. (Type 's' followed by a click of the left-most 
      mouse button to select the short wavelength limit, and then a second click to select 
      the long wavelength limit.) The plotted spectra will exhibit a gap at the selected 
      wavelength range. The user must then "turn on" those spectra s/he wishes to include 
      in the combining procedure, by clicking on the corresponding boxes on the left hand 
      side. (Note that for various reasons, to turn on a spectrum, the corresponding button 
      must be clicked "off".) As each box is clicked the corresponding spectrum will re-appear 
      in the gap. Once the user is satisfied with her/his wavelength and spectra selections, 
      s/he should click on the Accept button. This will generate the mask for the selected 
      order which will be used in the combining process. Clicking on the "Clear Mask" 
      button will remove the gaps generated in the current Xmkpixmask plot window and
      return the use to the main Xcombspec window.
      
III. Combining Spectra

   9. The user should now choose the statistic to be used for the combining procedure. 
      There are several statistics to choose from, and we briefly describe them here. For 
      the robust statistics, a clipping threshold can be chosen. We recommend using the 
      "Robust Weighted Mean" with a clipping threshold of 8 (sigma), which is the default.

      Robust Weighted Mean: A sigma clipping algorithm is used to identify outliers. 
      The value at each pixel is then the weighted average of the good pixels and the 
      error is given by the error on the mean (rms deviation divided by root N). 
 
      Robust Mean (RMS): A sigma clipping algorithm is used to identify outliers. The 
      value at each pixel is the mean of the good pixels and the error is given by rms 
      deviation of the pixels.

      Robust Mean (Mean Error): A sigma clipping algorithm is used to identify outliers.  
      The value at each pixel is the mean of the good pixels and the error is given by the 
      error on the mean (rms deviation of the pixels divided by root N.)

      Weighted Mean: A weighted mean and error (on the mean) are given at each pixel.

      Mean (RMS):  The value at each pixel is given by the mean and the rms deviation 
      of the pixels.

      Mean (Mean error): The value at each pixel is the mean of the pixel values and the 
      error is given by the error on the mean (rms deviation of the pixels divided by root N.)

      Median (MAD):  The value at each wavelength is given by the median of the pixels. 
      The error is given by the Median Absolute Deviation (MAD) which is given by 
      MAD=1.4826* median( abs(x_i - med) ).  In the limit of a gaussian distribution, the 
      MAD=sigma.

      Median (Median Error): The value at each wavelength is given by the median of the pixels.  
      The error is given by the MAD/ root (N).

IV. Write the Output File

  9. The user should now choose the output format (FITS is assumed unless the
      user selects the "Text" box) and give the name of the output file in the "Output 
      File" field and click on the "Write File" button.  The final combined spectrum 
      will be displayed.

V.  Note about Xcombspec

     XCOMBSPEC (v3.3) now applies a single scale factor, determined from the
     user-selected order, to all the orders. Older versions determined separate 
     scale factors for each order. The switch to a single scale factor per spectrum
     was made because (1) we found that the use of separate scale factors for each 
     order resulted in mismatches in the flux levels in the order overlap regions 
     in the final combined spectrum; and (2) scale factors could not be determined
     reliably in those orders with low S/N. The use of a single scale factor determined
     from a high S/N order obviates problem (2) while simultaneously yielding excellent
     flux level agreement in the order overlap regions of the combined spectrum.

     Nevertheless, the adoption of a single scale factor has revealed another 
     challenge for the combining procedure and software. If there were no 
     systematic/instrumental effects, the use of a single scale factor for a given 
     spectrum across all orders should give the same result as applying separate scale
     factors for each order. However, as explained above, we have found that, after 
     adopting a single scale factor for each spectrum across all orders, the slopes 
     of spectra recorded by SpeX for a single object within a block of 5 A-B pairs 
     taken one after another can vary by a few percent. 
     
     Although it is not yet clear exactly what causes this variation, we believe it
     results from a combination of physical effects (flexure, guiding errors, 
     atmospheric dispersion, variable transmission, etc.) and it does not appear 
     to be due to any procedures involved in the data reduction. We believe
     that the new version of xcombspec incorporates the appropriate procedure for 
     combining these spectra (yielding the median spectrum with the correct slope). 
     Nevertheless, we urge users to perform the same steps and use the same 
     statistics for their standard stars as for their objects.

