XMERGEORDERS
------------

Xmergeorders allows the user to merge the various orders of
reduced SpeX data into a single spectrum. 

Xmergeorders is a fully resizing widget.

Cursor commands:

a - Sets the 'a'bsolute range to the current x and y range

b - Enters the cutting mode for the blue spectrum.  

c - Clear mouse mode.
    Use to clear a zoom, fix, or remove session.

i - To zoom IN in whatever zoom mode the cursor is currently
    in.

f - To toggle between having the blue and green spectrum in front

g - Enters the cutting mode for the green spectrum.  

l - Changes the cutting direction to 'Left'

o - To zoom OUT in whatever zoom mode the cursor is currently
    in.

r - Changes the cutting direction to 'Right'

u - To undo a cut created with either 'b' or 'g'

w - To plot the entire spectrum

x - Enters x zoom mode
    Press and release left mouse button at lower x value and 
    then at upper x value.

y - Enters y zoom mode
    Press and release left mouse button at lower y value and 
    then at upper y value.

z - Enters zoom mode
    Press and release the left mouse button in one corner of the
    zoom box and then move the cursor to the other corner and 
    press and release the left mouse button.


I. Starting Up

   1. Type "xmergeorders" at the IDL prompt. This will bring up the 
      Xmergeorders panel.

   2. If the user is in the directory where the data is stored, skip to 
      step 3.  If not, type in the directory path for the data, or click on 
      the "Path" button and choose the path from the list shown.

   3. Type in the file name of the data, or click on the "Input Spectrum"
      button and choose the file from the list shown.

   4. Select whether or not to allow errors to be propagated throughout 
      the combining procedure.

   5. Click on the "Load Spectrum" button to load the data file.

   6. Choose an "Anchor Order" from the pull down menu. The Anchor order
      is the order with which Xmergeorders will start. All other orders will
      be added to this order (with appropriate scaling factors if desired).

II. Adding Orders

   7. After choosing an Anchor order, Xmergeorders will present a list of
      of neighboring orders that can be merged with the anchor order. For
      example, if the Anchor order is selected to be order 7, Xmergeorders
      will allow the user to choose either order 6 or 8 to be merged with
      order 7. Select the order to be added. The anchor order and the order 
      to be added will both be plotted in the upper plot window next to the 
      control panel for Xmergeorders. The anchor order will appear in blue, 
      and the order to be added will appear in green. The S/N spectra will 
      appear in the bottom window.

   8. The added order can be scaled to match the level of the anchor order.
      Type "s" (for "select"), and click with the left-most mouse button on 
      the short and long wavelength boundaries of the region to be used to 
      compute the relative scaling factor. When the user clicks on the 
      "Auto Scale" button, Xmergeorder will compute the best scale factor
      for the added order and re-plot the scaled spectrum. The computed
      scale factor will be shown in the "Scale:" field. Alternatively, the
      user can enter a number in this field and Xmergeorders will scale the
      added order accordingly.  To reset the scale, type 1.0 in the 
      scale field and hit return.  Note the 's' button will only
      work if the two spectra overlap.  If there is no overlap, (e.g., Orders
      3 and 4 of ShortXD) the user can still scale the added order by 
      manually typing the scale factor in the Scale field.

   9. Sections of either the anchor order or the added order can be cut
      out before the two spectra are merged.  Type "g" (or click "Green" 
      for the Trim Spectrum) to trim regions from the green spectrum.  
      Then choose the direction of the cut by typing 'r' or 'l' (or click 
      'Left' or 'Right' for the Trim Direction).  Clicking with the 
      left-most mouse button removes the spectrum in the desired direction.
      The blue spectrum can be trimed in a similar fashion by typing
      'b' and the 'r' or 'l'.  To undo any cut, type "u".

      A preview of what Xmergeorders will produce for any two plotted
      spectra can be seen by selecting the "Combine" button. Selecting 
      the "Overlap" button will show the two separate spectra again.
      Either spectrum can be temporarily removed from the plot by unchecking
      the "Blue" or "Green" buttons in the Xmergeorders panel.

  10. When the user is satisfied with the scaling and trimming of the 
      the spectra, s/he should click on the "Merge Orders" button.
      Xmergeorders will then combine the spectra using a weighted average. 
 
  11. Repeat steps 7-10 until all orders are merged.

III. Write the Output File

  12. When all orders have been merged, give the name of the output file 
      in the "File Name" field and click on the "Write File" button. 



