XMERGXD
------------

Xmergexd allows the user to merge the ShortXD and LongXD
spectra into a single spectrum. 

Xmergexd is a fully resizing widget.

Cursor commands:

b - Enters the cutting mode for the blue spectrum.  

c - Clear mouse mode.
    Use to clear a zoom, fix, or remove session.

i - To zoom IN in whatever zoom mode the cursor is currently
    in.

g - Enters the cutting mode for the green spectrum.  

l - Changes the cutting direction to 'Left'

o - To zoom OUT in whatever zoom mode the cursor is currently
    in.

r - Changes the cutting direction to 'Right'

u - To undo a cut created with either 'b' or 'g'

w - To plot the entire spectrum

x - Enters x zoom mode
    Press and release left mouse button at lower x value and 
    then at upper x value.

y - Enters y zoom mode
    Press and release left mouse button at lower y value and 
    then at upper y value.

z - Enters zoom mode
    Press and release the left mouse button in one corner of the
    zoom box and then move the cursor to the other corner and 
    press and release the left mouse button.


I. Starting Up

   1. Type "xmergexd" at the IDL prompt. This will bring up the 
      Xmergexd panel.

   2. Type in the file name of the ShortXD data, or click on the "ShortXD"
      button and choose the file from the list shown.

   3. Type in the file name of the LongXD data, or click on the "LongXD"
      button and choose the file from the list shown.  

   4. Select whether or not to allow errors to be propagated throughout 
      the combining procedure.

   5. Click on the "Load Spectrum" button to load the data file.

II. Combining the Spectra

   6. Choose which spectrum, the SXD or LXD spectrum, will be the anchor 
      spectrum.  

   7. The non-anchor spectrum can be scaled to match the level of the anchor 
      spectrum.  Type "s" (for "select"), and click with the left-most mouse 
      button on the short and long wavelength boundaries of the region to be 
      used to compute the relative scaling factor. When the user clicks on the 
      "Auto Scale" button, Xmergexd will compute the best scale factor
      for the non-anchor spectrum and re-plot the scaled spectrum. The computed
      scale factor will be shown in the "Scale:" field. Alternatively, the
      user can enter a number in this field and Xmergexd will scale the
      non-anchor spectrum accordingly.

   8. Sections of either the ShortXD or the LongXD can be cut
      out before the two spectra are merged.  Type "g" (or click "Green" 
      for the Trim Spectrum) to trim regions from the green spectrum.  
      Then choose the direction of the cut by typing 'r' or 'l' (or click 
      'Left' or 'Right' for the Trim Direction).  Clicking with the 
      left-most mouse button removes the spectrum in the desired direction.
      The blue spectrum can be trimed in a similar fashion by typing
      'b' and the 'r' or 'l'.  To undo any cut, type "u".  To undo any 
      cut, type "u".

      A preview of what Xmergexd will produce for the combined spectrum 
      can be seen by selecting the "Combine" button. Selecting the "Overlap" 
      button will show the two separate spectra again.  Either spectrum can 
      be temporarily removed from the plot by unchecking the "Blue" or 
      "Green" buttons in the Xmergexd panel.

   9. When the user is satisfied with the scaling and trimming of the 
      the spectra, s/he should click on the "Merge Orders" button.
      Xmergexd will then combine the spectra using a weighted average. 
 
III. Write the Output File

  10. When all orders have been merged, give the name of the output file 
      in the "File Name" field and click on the "Write File" button. 
