XTELLCOR_BASIC
--------------

If the user wishes simply to divide an object spectrum by a standard
star spectrum and then mutliply the result by a blackbody, s/he can use
the program Xtellcor_basic.

1. Type "xtellcor_basic" at the IDL prompt.

I.  Loading the Data

    2.  If the user is not working in the directory where the 
        data is stored, enter the path either by clicking on 
        the Path button or by typing the path into the field.
        If the user is in the directory where the data is located, 
        then this field can be left blank.  

    3.  Enter the filename for the standard star spectrum in the "Std Spectra"
        field, or choose a filename from the list that pops up when the 
        "Std Spectra" button is clicked.

    4.  Enter the filename for the object spectrum in the "Obj Spectra"
        field, or choose a filename from the list that pops up when the 
        "Obj Spectra" button is clicked.

II.  Determining Residual Wavelength Shifts

    5.  It is possible that there are slight wavelength shifts between 
	the standard star used to construct the telluric spectrum and the 
	the object to be corrected. These shifts need to be removed in 
	order to avoid introducing spurious noise and artifacts when
	dividing the object spectrum by the telluric spectrum. To estimate
	the wavelength shifts and correct them, choose an order from the
        pull-down menu "Order" in section 2 "Determine Shift" of the 
        Xtellcor_basic control panel. Then click on the "Get Shift" button.

        The Xfindshift panel will apear. The object spectrum and the 
        telluric spectrum are both plotted in the upper window. The 
	result of dividing one by the other is shown in the bottom window.

    6.  Select a region containing a reasonably strong atmospheric features 
        in both spectra. This is done by typing "s" (for "select") and 
        click with the left-most mouse button on either side of the feature.
        Then click on the "Auto Find" button. Xfindshift will shift the
	telluric spectrum by fractions of a pixel and search for the 
        best value, corresponding to a minimum in the RMS computed from 
        the telluric corrected spectrum in the selected region. 

        The wavelength shifts can be reset to zero by typing zero in the 
        Shift field and hitting return.

        If you wish to check the shift obtained from a different region,
        type "s" and select a new wavelength region. To determine the 
        shift estimated from other orders, click on the "Cancel" button, 
        choose a new order from the Xtellcor_basic control panel, and repeat 
        the procedure. 

        When the user is satisfied with the shift found by Xfindshift,
        s/he should click on the "Accept" button at the bottom of the panel.
        This shift will be applied to ALL of the orders within a given 
        aperture.

III.  Restoring the Continuum Shape

    7.  Select whether the absolute flux level of the object spectrum should 
        be preserved with the "Yes" or "No" buttons. If "Yes" is chosen, 
        the user must enter the V mag of the standard star and the blackbody 
        temperature, and choose the units of the output spectrum from the 
        pull-down menu.

IV. Generate the Output Files

    8. Give the name of the output file in the "Output File" field.

    9. Click on the "Construct Spectra" button. 


