Xtellcor
========

Xtellcor is an IDL-based telluric correction program written by
Bill Vacca and Mike Cushing for use with SpeX.  This program works
only if the standard star is an A0 V star since it uses a high-resolution 
model of Vega (A0 V) to remove the intrinsic stellar features. Currently
xtellcor works for ShortXD, LongXD, and LowRes15. Users can find a
description of the code, as well as pictures of the various widgets and
plots used in the procedure, in the paper by Vacca, Cushing, & Rayner (2003,
PASP, 115, 389) and we would ask all users to reference this paper. The
screen dumps of the widgets are particularly useful for understanding
the steps and procedures involved.
 
We recommend keeping this help window up throughout the telluric
correction process if the user is unfamiliar with the process since
it will be unaccessable during many of the pop-up widget processes.

All of the plot windows in XTELLCOR are fully resizeable.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Cursor Commands:
----------------

The following cursor commands are general and are used in all of the 
pop-up widgets.

General Cursor commands:

c - To clear a normalization, zoom, or line selection mode.

i - To zoom IN in whatever zoom mode the cursor is currently in

o - To zoom OUT in whatever zoom mode the cursor is currently in

w - To plot the entire (WHOLE) spectrum
    Can be used to clear a previous zoom-in.

x - Enters x zoom mode.
    Press (and release) left mouse button at lower x value and 
    then press (and release) the left mouse button at the 
    upper x value.

y - Enters y zoom mode.
    Press (and release) left mouse button at lower y value and 
    then press (and release) left mouse button at the 
    upper y value.

z - Cursor enters zoom mode.
    Press (and release) the left mouse button in one corner of the 
    zoom box and then move the cursor to the other corner and press 
    (and release) the left mouse button.

The following cursor commands are used in only some specific windows,
described below.

Special Cursor Commands:

e - Estimate the scale factors in the Xscalelines procedure.

f - To fix a region of the telluric spectrum in the Xscalelines procedure.
    Press and release the left mouse button on the left and 
    right side of the bad region.  The bad region is replaced 
    using the edge pixels to define a line.  Type "u" to undo 
    the edit.

m - modify the boundaries of a selected continuum region in the 
    Xconkern procedure.

n - Cursor enters normalization mode in Xconkern.
    Select continuum regions to normalize the spectrum by
    clicking the left mouse button on the left and right sides
    of the region.

s - Select a wavelength region in Xconkern and Xfindshift.

--------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------

0.  Starting Up

       0.  Type "xtellcor" at the IDL prompt. This will bring up the 
           Xtellcor control panel, which is divided into 5 sections 
           corresponding to the steps to be carried out in performing 
	   the telluric correction on an input object spectrum.

I.  Loading the Data

       1.  If the user is not working in the directory where the 
           data is stored, enter the path either by clicking on 
           the Path button and selecting the directory, or by typing 
           the path into the field.
	        IF THE USER IS IN THE DIRECTORY WHERE THE DATA IS LOCATED, 
           THEN THIS FIELD CAN BE LEFT BLANK.  

       2.  Load the standard star spectra by giving the filename in the
	        "Std Spectra:" field, either by typing the filename or selecting
           it from the pop-up menu after clicking on the "Std Spectra"
           button.

           NOTE: THE STANDARD STAR FILE MUST CONTAINN ONLY A SINGLE
                 APERTURE.  IF THE STANDARD STAR WAS EXTRACTED FROM A
                 SET OF COMBINED IMAGES, THEN THE TWO APERTURES MUST
                 FIRST BE COMBINED USING XCOMBSPEC (SELECT COMBINE
                 APERTURES IN BOX 1)

       3.  Give the B and V magnitude of the standard star.  If the 
           magnitudes are unknown, the user can enter the same magnitude 
           (any number) for B and V.  In this case, the pseudo flux 
           calibration will not be correct.  

       4.  Load the object spectra by giving the apropriate filename in
           the "Obj. Spectra:" field.

       5.  Click the Load Spectra button. Note that the Airmass values 
           for both spectra, and the airmass difference, will appear at
           at the top of the Xtellcor panel.

II.  Deriving the Kernel

       6.  The next step involves generating a convolution kernel that
	   will be applied to a (stored) model spectrum of Vega. The
           kernel will be convolved with the Vega model spectrum (which will
           then be scaled to the observed magnitudes of the A0V star) in 
           order to simulate the observed spectrum of the A0V standard star 
           at the resolution of the SpeX data. The division of the observed
           stellar spectrum by the convolved and scaled Vega spectrum will 
           then yield the telluric correction spectrum that will be applied 
	   to the object spectrum.

           There are two methods available to generate the kernel. The first
	   involves creating the kernel based on the observed spectrum
           the standard star. The second method generates a kernel from
           the profile of the arc lines. The first method should be more 
           accurate, yields better telluric corrections, and should be carried 
           out whenever possible. However, in some cases, (e.g., performing 
           telluric corrections for some LXD and all prism spectra), only the 
           second method is possible. (The reasons will become clear shortly.) 
           Both methods will be described in the following.
           
           If the user is reducing SXD or LXD data and wishes to generate 
           the convolution kernel from the observed A0 V star, s/he should 
	   select the "Deconvolution" button. 

       "IP" Method: 
       ------------
 
       7.  If the user is building the convolution kernel from the shape of
	   the arc lines, s/he should select the "IP" (for 
           "Instrument Profile") button and simply click on the "Construct 
           Kernel" button in section 2 of the Xtellcor control panel. Then 
           continue with step 17. The IP method is recommended for reducing 
           LowRes spectra and any LXD spectra for which the observed A0V 
           spectrum contains no suitable (high S/N) H lines.

       "Deconvolution" Method:
       -----------------------

       8.  If the user is building the convolution kernel from the spectra of 
           the observed A0V standard star, s/he should select "Deconvolution". 
           Then choose an order from the pull down menu in section 2 of the 
	   Xtellcor panel. The selected order should contain a H absorption 
           line in the spectrum of the A0V standard star that is *unaffected* 
           by telluric absorption and has high S/N. The Paschen delta line at 
           1.005 microns has been found to have minimal contamination by 
           telluric features at the resolution of SpeX data. This is in order 
           6 in the SXD mode. We have also obtained very satisfactory results 
           using the Br gamma and Br alpha lines when reducing LXD spectra. 
           These are in orders 9 and 5, respectively, of LXD data. The 
           Deconvolution method is recommended for reducing SXD spectra, and 
           LXD spectra whenever the A0V standard star spectrum has high S/N. 

       9.  Click on the "Construct Kernel" button. The Xconkern panel will
	   appear and the spectrum of the A0 V star in the chosen order will 
           be plotted in the upper half. 

      10.  The user now must normalize the stellar spectrum by selecting 
           "continuum" regions from the data and fitting them with a 
           polynomial. Select the "Spectrum" button for the choice of "Window"
           at the top of the Xconkern panel. Typing "n" will put the user into
           the "normalization mode". Spectral regions representing continuum 
           that are to be fitted by the program can then be chosen by clicking
           twice with the left-most mouse button, once for the short wavelength
           limit of the region and once for the long wavelength limit. The 
           region thus selected will be designated with dashed blue vertical 
           lines. The boundaries of a region can be shifted in wavelength by 
           typing "m" (for "modify") and dragging the blue line leftward or 
           rightward by clicking on the left-most mouse button and keeping it 
           held down while moving the mouse. The user can continue in this 
           manner to select any number of normalization regions. If s/he 
           wishes to erase all regions and start the selection process over 
           again, s/he can do so by clicking on the "Clear" button at the top 
           right of the window.

           Successful kernels can be generated by normalizing either the 
           entire order spectrum (as shown in the PASP article) or by 
           expanding the region around the chosen H line (with the "z" cursor 
           command - see the list of cursor commands above) and normalizing 
           the continuum only around that line.

      11.  Once all desired continuum fitting regions have been selected, 
	   choose the degree of the polynomial fit using the pull down
	   menu at the top of the Xconkern panel. (Degrees of 6-9 seems to 
           work well to normalize the entire spectrum of an A0 V star in order
	   6.) Then click on the "Fit Continuum" button. The polynomial
	   fitted to the continuum regions will be overplotted on the spectrum.

      12.  Repeat steps 10 and 11 until a satisfactory continuum fit is 
           obtained.

      13.  Once a good fit to the continuum is achieved, select the 
	   "Normalized Spectrum" button at the top of the Xconkern panel. This
	   will display the normalized spectrum of the standard star. 

      14.  The user now must select a wavelength region containing an 
	   absorption line that will be used to construct a kernel. This
	   is done by typing "s" (for "select") and clicking with the 
	   left-most mouse button on the short and long wavelengths 
           bracketing the absorption line. For the Pa Delta line, low
           and high wavelength limits of approximately 1.000 and 1.010 microns
           have been found to work reasonably well. Then click on the 
           "Construct Kernel" button in the middle of the panel

      15.  The program then generates a convolution kernel using the
	   method described in the paper by Vacca et al. (2002). It then
	   convolves this kernel with the model spectrum of Vega and divides
	   the observed spectrum of the standard A0 V star by this convolved
	   Vega spectrum. The observed spectrum of the standard star, the 
	   the original Vega spectrum (binned to the sampling of the A0 V
	   star), the convolved Vega spectrum, and the result of the 
	   division ("residuals") are displayed in the bottom window of the
	   Xconkern panel. Experience has shown that it is fairly easy to
	   obtain residuals with maximum deviations of less than about
           1.5%, and RMS deviations less than about 0.7% about the Pa delta
           line in good S/N standard star spectra.

      16.  The user can continue with steps 10-15 until s/he is satisfied with 
           the residuals of the convolution. The s/he should click on the 
           "Accept" button. Xtellcor will then convolve the Vega model with 
           the kernel and scale the model to the observed A0V magnitudes. The 
           division of the observed A0V spectrum by this scaled and convolved 
           Vega spectrum generates the "Telluric Correction Spectrum".

III. Constructing the Telluric Spectrum

      17.  The user can now make adjustments to account for the fact that
           the observed A0 V star may not have the same strengths of the 
	   Hydrogen lines as in the Vega model spectrum. Click on the
	   "Scale Lines" button in section 3. of the Xtellcor control panel. 
           The Xscalelines panel will appear. 

           In the bottom window of the panel is the estimate of the telluric
           spectrum (in white) and a typical atmospheric absorption spectrum,
           multiplied by the SpeX throughput curve for the mode (in yellow). 
           The SpeX throughput curve or the atmospheric spectrum can be viewed 
           individually by deselecting the other with the buttons in the 
           middle of the panel. The telluric spectrum, or the result of 
           applying this telluric to the object spectrum, can be viewed by 
           selecting one of the "Spectrum" buttons in the middle of the panel 
           ("Telluric" or "Object" spectrum).  The Hydrogen lines present in 
           A0 V stars are labeled and marked in green. 
           
           Ideally, the telluric spectrum should look similar to the typical 
           atmospheric absorption spectrum times the instrument throughput 
           (which is a smoothly varying function). However, because the 
           Equivalent Widths of the H lines in the observed star do not 
           necessarily match those in the model spectrum of Vega, broad 
           emission or absorption features may appear in the telluric spectrum
           at the wavelengths of the H lines.  Xscalelines provides a method 
           of scaling the model equivalent widths in order to remove these 
           features from the telluric spectrum. (See step 18).
 
           In the upper panel is a plot of the initial scale factors
	   used by the program to scale the H line Equivalent Widths in the
	   model spectrum. If the user constructed the kernel with the 
           Deconvolution method, all the scales will be set to the ratio of
           the equivalent width in the observed spectrum to the equivalent
           width in the model spectrum. If the user constructed the kernel
	   with the IP method, all scales will be set to unity.

      18.  The goal of this step is to remove the stellar H lines from the
           telluric spectrum and generate a telluric correction spectrum that 
           contains only those features due to atmospheric absorption. The 
           typical telluric spectrum shown in yellow should give the user an 
           idea of where the true atmospheric features are, what their 
           approximate relative strengths should be after removal of the 
           stellar H lines, and how much the H lines in the (white) telluric 
           spectrum should be scaled so that the white spectrum approximates 
           the yellow one. To scale the strengths of the H lines, the user can 
           zoom in on a region around any stellar H line in the bottom panel 
           with the "z" command. If the line is fairly isolated and has 
           continuum regions on either side of it, the user can type "e" (for 
           "Estimate) and click the left-most mouse button twice, once on each
           side of the feature in the continuum regions. Xscalelines will 
           automatically attempt to compute the best scale factor for that 
           particular line based on a fit of a background+gaussian profile to 
           the region in the telluric spectrum selected with the 'e' command. 
           (We do not recommend use 'e' on the H lines in LowRes15 spectra, 
           see below). The scale factors can also be adjusted by hand by 
           clicking on the green points in the upper window with the left-most 
           mouse button, holding the button down, and dragging the point up 
           or down. 

           If the user finds that s/he is unable to satisfactorily remove the 
           the stellar H line from the telluric correction spectrum, s/he has  
           the option of linearly interpolating over any remaining residual 
           features.  This option can also be used if the star used as 
           a telluric standard is found to have emission - rather than 
           absorption - at some of the H transitions.  Type 'f' (for fix) 
           and then click the left mouse button on the left and then 
           right side of the residual feature.  The residual feature will 
           be interpolated over using the flux values at the wavelengths 
           chosen by the user.  To undo the interpolation, type 'u'.  
 
         ***NOTE: The interpolation  feature should be used with caution 
           since any atmospheric features present will also be removed from 
           the telluric correction spectrum. We recommend restricting the use 
           of this option to only those regions and features where the 
           typical atmospheric spectrum is seen to be very smooth (e.g. in 
           order 8 of the SXD mode).

           Whenever the scale factors are adjusted (either by using the 'e' 
           or 'f' commands or by dragging them by the user by hand), 
           Xscalelines will fit a spline through all the scale factors at 
           each H line and use the new array of scale factors to recompute a 
           new telluric spectrum. The telluric-corrected object spectrum can 
           be examined at any stage by selecting the "Object" button at the 
           top of the lower window. This will show the user what the effects 
           of changing the scale factors are on the object spectrum. However, 
           we do not recommend that users base their scale factor adjustments 
           on the results seen in the Object spectrum! The scale factors 
           should be adjusted based on the generation of a telluric spectrum 
           that approximates the typical atmospheric curve.

           When the user is satisfied with the telluric spectrum in each order,
           s/he should click on the "Accept" button at the bottom of the 
           Xscalelines panel. 

      19.  Examine the telluric spectrum in each order (by selecting the order 
           from the "Order" pull-down menu in the middle of the Xscalelines 
	   panel) and correct as many features as necessary using the method 
           described above. Typically, orders 7 and 8 in the SXD mode require 
           the most corrections, and often they require the interpolation 
           option described above. 

           Note that for some features it may not be possible to remove the 
           residuals completely. This is particularly the case when using 
           the IP mode. In some cases it may be necessary to shift the Vega 
           model spectrum relative to the observed spectrum in order to 
           decrease the size of the residuals. (A relative velocity offset 
           is computed in the "Deconvolution" method, but not when the "IP" 
           method is used.) The user can enter a relative velocity in the 
           "Vshift" field at the top of the Xscalelines window. Due to a 
           wavelength shift (or offset) in the original low-resolution Vega 
           model file from Kurucz, velocity shifts of ~300 km s-1 are not 
           uncommon for the LowRes15 mode.  The Vega model used to construct 
           the telluric correction spectrum is then shifted and a new 
           telluric correction spectrum is generated.  Note that the velocity 
           shift is applied to all orders simultaneously. It is not possible 
           to apply different velocity shifts to different orders. 

       20. When all orders have been inspected and the line scaling has been 
           finished, the user can select the units desired for the output 
           telluric-corrected object spectrum from the "Units" pull-down menu. 
           Then click on the "Construct Telluric Spectrum" button. The program 
           will then construct the telluric spectrum for each order by dividing
           the observed A0V standard star spectrum by the convolved and scaled 
           Vega model whose H line EWs have been adjusted as described in steps
           18-19.

IV.  Determining Residual Wavelength Shifts

      21.  We often find there are slight wavelength shifts between 
	   the A0 V star used to construct the telluric spectrum and the 
	   the object to be corrected. These shifts need to be removed in 
	   order to avoid introducing spurious noise and artifacts when
	   dividing the object spectrum by the telluric spectrum. To estimate
	   the wavelength shifts and correct them, choose an Aperture and an
           Order from the pull-down menus in section 4 ("Determine Shift") of 
           the Xtellcor control panel. Then click on the "Get Shift" button.

           The Xfindshift panel will appear. The object spectrum and the 
           telluric spectrum are both plotted in the upper window. The 
	   result of dividing one by the other is shown in the bottom window.

      22.  Select a region containing a reasonably strong atmospheric features 
           in both spectra (and preferably one not containing strong absorption
           or emission features in the object spectrum). This is done by 
           typing "s" (for "select") and click with the left-most mouse button
           on either side of the features. Then click on the "Auto Find" 
           button in the upper left of the panel. Xfindshift will shift the 
           telluric spectrum by fractions of a pixel and search for the best 
           value, corresponding to a minimum in the RMS computed from the 
           telluric corrected spectrum in the selected region. Alternatively, 
           if the user desires a specific shift value (perhaps as the result 
           of determining the shift from another order), s/he can enter the 
           value directly in the "Shift" field and hitting return. SImilarly, 
           wavelength shifts can be reset to zero by typing zero in the Shift 
           field and hitting return. The user can determine the shift obtained 
           from a different wavelength region by typing "s" and selecting a 
           new wavelength region. 

           When the user is satisfied with the shift found by Xfindshift,
           s/he should click on the "Accept" button at the bottom of the panel.

           Because we have often found that different orders require different
	   shift values, wavelength shifts can now (v3.3) be determined for 
           each order independently.  Determining individual and independent 
           shift values for each order should yield the best telluric 
           correction results. After Accepting (or not accepting by hitting 
           Cancel) the shift in a given order, s/he simply selects a new order
           from the Xtellcor control panel, and repeats the procedure. 

V. Generate the Output Files

      23.  Choose the format of the output files by selecting from the FITS or
	   Text option in section 5 of the Xtellcor panel. Give the name of
	   the output file in the "Object File" field. For FITS file output, 
           the .fits suffix will be automatically appended to the output name.
           The user can also choose to output the telluric correction spectrum
           as well as the modified Vega model spectrum (shifted to the radial 
           velocity, scaled to the optical mag of the input standard star, 
           convolved with the kernel, and multiplied by the equivalent width 
           scale factor array). Click on the "Write File" button to generate 
           the output files. 

      24.  If one observation of an A0V standard is being used to perform 
           telluric corrections for multiple objects, it is not necessary to 
           re-generate the telluric correction curve each time. The user 
           should generate the curve once, for the first object, using 
           xtellcor, making sure that the telluric curve is saved and written 
           out at the end of the process.  For the next object to be 
           corrected, the user can start up the routine xtellcor_finish.
           Xtellcor_finish will take the previously generated telluric curve 
           and the target object as input. The user will be able to shift the 
           two spectra, as in steps 21-22 of the full xtellcor procedure. 
           After the best shift is found, xtellcor_finish will divide the two 
           spectra and output the corrected object spectrum.






