Xtellcor_general
================

Xtellcor_general is an IDL-based telluric correction program written by
Bill Vacca and Mike Cushing.  This program works only if the standard star 
is an A0 V star since it uses a high-resolution model of Vega (A0 V) to 
remove the intrinsic stellar features. Users can find a description of the 
code, as well as pictures of the various widgets and plots used in the 
procedure, in the paper by Vacca, Cushing, & Rayner (2003, PASP, 115, 389) 
and we ask all users to reference this paper. The screen dumps of the 
widgets are particularly useful for understanding the steps and procedures 
involved.  The paper is available on the IRTF SpeX website.

We recommend keeping this help window up throughout the telluric
correction process if the user is unfamiliar with the process since
it will be unaccessable during many of the pop-up widget processes.

All of the plot windows in XTELLCOR_GENERAL are fully resizeable.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cursor Commands:
----------------

The following cursor commands are general and are used in all of the 
pop-up widgets.

General Cursor commands:

c - To clear a normalization, zoom, or line selection mode.

i - To zoom IN in whatever zoom mode the cursor is currently in

o - To zoom OUT in whatever zoom mode the cursor is currently in

w - To plot the entire (WHOLE) spectrum
    Can be used to clear a previous zoom-in.

x - Enters x zoom mode.
    Press (and release) left mouse button at lower x value and 
    then press (and release) the left mouse button at the 
    upper x value.

y - Enters y zoom mode.
    Press (and release) left mouse button at lower y value and 
    then press (and release) left mouse button at the 
    upper y value.

z - Cursor enters zoom mode.
    Press (and release) the left mouse button in one corner of the 
    zoom box and then move the cursor to the other corner and press 
    (and release) the left mouse button.

The following cursor commands are used in only some specific windows,
described below.

Special Cursor Commands:

e - Estimate the scale factors in the Xscalelines procedure.

f - To fix a region of the telluric spectrum in the Xscalelines procedure.
    Press and release the left mouse button on the left and 
    right side of the bad region.  The bad region is replaced 
    using the edge pixels to define a line.  Type "u" to undo 
    the edit.

m - modify the boundaries of a selected continuum region in the 
    Xconkern procedure.

n - Cursor enters normalization mode in Xconkern.
    Select continuum regions to normalize the spectrum by
    clicking the left mouse button on the left and right sides
    of the region.

s - Select a wavelength region in Xconkern and Xfindshift.

--------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------

0.   Starting Up

       1.  Type "xtellcor_general" at the IDL prompt. This will bring up 
           the Xtellcor control panel, which is divided into 4 sections 
           corresponding to the steps to be carried out in performing 
	   the telluric correction on an input object spectrum.

I. Loading the Data

       2.  If the user is not working in the directory where the 
           data is stored, enter the path either by clicking on 
           the Path button or by typing the path into the field.
	   If the user is in the directory where the data is located, 
           then this field can be left blank.  

       3.  Load the standard star spectrum by giving the filename in the
	   "Std Spectrum:" field.  This file should be a text file with 
           wavelength in the first column and "flux" in the second column. 
           A third column with error values is optional. The default suffix 
           of the file is assumed to be .dat.

       4.  Give the B and V magnitude of the standard star.  If the 
           magnitudes are unknown, entered the same magnitude 
           (any number) for B and V.  In this case, the pseudo flux 
           calibration will not be correct.  

       5.  Load the object spectrum by giving the apropriate filename in
           the "Obj. Spectra:" field. Again, this should be a text file
	   with wavelength in the first column and flux in the second. A
           third column with error values is optional.

       6.  Choose the wavelength units for the input files from the pull-down 
           menu.

       7.  Give the FWHM of the instrument profile. The units must be the same
           as that chosen for the wavelengths. The code currently assumes that 
           the instrument profile is a Gaussian of the specified width.


       8.  The observed absorption lines in the A star spectrum may be 
           intrinsically broadened by rotation. If the rotation velocity 
           is larger than the corresponding spectral resolution of the 
           observations, this broadening will be noticeable and the IP 
           convolution procedure (see below) may not be able to generate 
           an accurate stellar template spectrum from the Vega model. 
           The resulting telluric correction spectrum may contain spurious 
           artifacts and produce unsatisfactory results.  To compensate 
           for this, xtellcor_general allows the user to input a value 
           of the rotation velocity (in km s-1) of the standard star, which 
           is then used to broaden the Vega model. The rotation velocities 
           of A stars can often be found in the literature.  The 
           rotation-broadened Vega spectrum is then used with the IP to 
           generate a template spectrum and a telluric correction spectrum 
           (see below).

       9.  Click the Load Spectra button. The spectra are loaded and the 
           Gaussian instrument profile is then convolved with a stored model 
           spectrum of Vega.

II.   Constructing the Telluric Spectrum

      10.  The user can now make adjustments to account for the fact that
           the observed A0 V star may not have the same strengths of the 
	   Hydrogen lines as in the Vega model spectrum. Click on the
	   "Scale Lines" button in section 2. of the control panel. 
           The Xscalelines panel will appear. 

           In the bottom window of the panel is the estimate of the telluric
           spectrum (in white) and a typical atmospheric absorption spectrum
           (in yellow). The telluric spectrum, or the result of applying this 
           telluric to the object spectrum, can be viewed by selecting one of 
           the "Spectrum" buttons in the middle of the panel ("Telluric" or 
           "Object" spectrum). The Hydrogen lines present in A0 V stars are 
           labeled and marked in green. 
           
           Ideally, the telluric spectrum should look similar to the typical 
           atmospheric absorption spectrum times the instrument throughput 
           (which is a smoothly varying function). However, because the 
           Equivalent Widths of the H lines in the observed star do not 
           necessarily match those in the model spectrum of Vega, broad 
           emission or absorption features may appear in the telluric 
           spectrum at the wavelengths of the H lines.  Xscalelines provides 
           a method of scaling the model equivalent widths in order to remove 
           these features from the telluric spectrum. (See step 11).
 
           In the upper panel is a plot of the initial scale factors
	   used by the program to scale the H line Equivalent Widths in the
	   model spectrum. Initially, all scales will be set to unity.

      11.  The goal of this step is to remove the stellar H lines from the 
           telluric spectrum and generate a telluric correction spectrum that 
           contains only those features due to atmospheric absorption and the 
           instrument response function. The typical telluric spectrum shown 
           in yellow should give the user an idea of where the true 
           atmospheric features are, what their approximate relative strengths
           should be after removal of the stellar H lines, and how much the H 
           lines in the (white) telluric spectrum should be scaled so that 
           the white spectrum approximates the yellow one. To scale the 
           strengths of the H lines, the user can zoom in on a region around 
           any stellar H line in the bottom panel with the "z" command. If 
           the line is fairly isolated and has continuum regions on either 
           side of it, the user can type "e" (for "Estimate") and click the 
           left-most mouse button twice, once on each side of the feature in 
           the continuum regions. Xscalelines will automatically attempt to 
           compute the best scale factor for that particular line based on a 
           fit of a background+gaussian profile to the region in the telluric 
           spectrum selected with the 'e' command. (We do not recommend use 
           'e' on the H lines in very low resolution spectra, see below). The 
           scale factors can also be adjusted by hand by clicking on the 
           green points in the upper window with the left-most mouse button, 
           holding the button down, and dragging the point up or down. 

           If the user finds that s/he is unable to satisfactorily remove the 
           the stellar H line from the telluric correction spectrum, s/he has  
           the option of linearly interpolating over any remaining residual 
           features.  This option can also be used if the star used as 
           a telluric standard is found to have emission - rather than 
           absorption - at some of the H transitions.  Type 'f' (for fix) 
           and then click the left mouse button on the left and then 
           right side of the residual feature.  The residual feature will 
           be interpolated over using the flux values at the wavelengths 
           chosen by the user.  To undo the interpolation, type 'u'.  
 
         ***NOTE: The interpolation  feature should be used with caution since
           any atmospheric features present will also be removed from the 
           telluric correction spectrum. We recommend restricting the use of 
           this option to only those regions and features where the typical 
           atmospheric spectrum is seen to be very smooth.

           Whenever the scale factors are adjusted (either by using the 'e' 
           or 'f' commands or by dragging them by the user by hand), 
           Xscalelines will fit a spline through all the scale factors at 
           each H line and use the new array of scale factors to recompute a 
           new telluric spectrum. The telluric-corrected object spectrum can 
           be examined at any stage by selecting the "Object" button at the 
           top of the lower window. This will show the user what the effects 
           of changing the scale factors are on the object spectrum. However, 
           we do not recommend that users base their scale factor adjustments 
           on the results seen in the Object spectrum! The scale factors  
           should be adjusted based on the generation of a telluric spectrum 
           that approximates the typical atmospheric curve.

           If the user is not happy with the adjusted scale factors, s/he can 
           click on the "Reset Control Points" button, and all scale factors 
           will be reset to unity. The "Cancel" button will close the 
           Xscalelines window, and allow the user to re-start the procedure. 

      12.  Examine the telluric spectrum and correct as many features as 
           necessary using the method described above. Note that for some 
           features it may not be possible to remove the residuals completely. 
           Also, it may be necessary to shift the Vega model spectrum relative
           to the observed spectrum in order to decrease the size of the 
           residuals. The user can enter a relative velocity in the "Vshift" 
           field at the top of the Xscalelines window. The Vega model used to 
           construct the telluric correction spectrum is then shifted and a 
           new telluric correction spectrum is generated.

           When the user is satisfied with the telluric spectrum,
           s/he should click on the "Accept" button at the bottom of the 
           Xscalelines panel. 
 
      13.  Select the units desired for the output telluric-corrected object
	   spectrum from the "Units" pull-down menu. Then click on the 
	   "Construct Telluric Spectrum" button. The program will then 
            construct the telluric spectrum for each order.

III.  Determining Residual Wavelength Shifts

      14.  It is possible that there are slight wavelength shifts between 
	   the A0 V star used to construct the telluric spectrum and the 
	   the object to be corrected. These shifts need to be removed in 
	   order to avoid introducing spurious noise and artifacts when
	   dividing the object spectrum by the telluric spectrum. To estimate
	   the wavelength shifts and correct them, click on the "Get Shift" 
           button in section 3. "Determine Shift" of the Xtellcor control 
           panel. 

           The Xfindshift panel will apear. The object spectrum and the 
           telluric spectrum are both plotted in the upper window. The 
	   result of dividing one by the other is shown in the bottom window.

      15.  Select a region containing a reasonably strong atmospheric features 
           in both spectra (and preferably one not containing strong absorption
           or emission features in the object spectrum). This is done by 
           typing "s" (for "select") and click with the left-most mouse 
           button on either side of the features. Then click on the 
           "Auto Find" button in the upper left of the panel. Xfindshift will 
           shift the telluric spectrum by fractions of a pixel and search for 
           the best value, corresponding to a minimum in the RMS computed 
           from the telluric corrected spectrum in the selected region. 
           Alternatively, if the user desires a specific shift value (perhaps 
           as the result of determining the shift from another order), s/he 
           can enter the value directly in the "Shift" field and hitting 
           return. SImilarly, wavelength shifts can be reset to zero by 
           typing zero in the Shift field and hitting return. The user can 
           determine the shift obtained from a different wavelength region by 
           typing "s" and selecting a new wavelength region. The "Cancel" 
           button will close the Xfindshift window, and allow the user to 
           re-start the procedure. 

           When the user is satisfied with the shift found by Xfindshift,
           s/he should click on the "Accept" button at the bottom of the panel.
 
IV. Generate the Output Files

      16.  Give the name of the output file in the "Object File" field. A 
           suffix of '.txt' will be added the filename.  The user can also 
           choose to output the telluric correction spectrum as well as the 
           modified Vega model spectrum (shifted to the radial velocity, 
           scaled to the optical mag of the input standard star, convolved 
           with the kernel, and multiplied by the equivalent width scale 
           factor array). Click on the "Write File" button to generate the 
           output files.  The output files consist of 3 columns of data, 
           wavelength in microns, flux in the units chosen by the user, and 
           error.  A widget called xzoomplot plot appears with the final 
           telluric corrected spectrum.  To modify the plot parameters, type 
           'm' in the plot window.  Type 'h' to learn about the cursor 
           commands.
